<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<title>Why We Drive</title>
<link href="../styles/9780062741981_template.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:2a8b3368-603b-44b8-a757-082f3b8bb11a" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<section>
<h1 class="head_1" id="sec_6"><a href="9780062741981_Contents.xhtml#sec_6_re"><span class="right_1" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_49" title="49"/>Breaking Down</a></h1>
<h1 class="head_1_sub"><a href="9780062741981_Contents.xhtml#sec_6_re"><i>1972 Jeepster Commando</i></a></h1>
<p class="noindent">I ordered another cup of coffee, though I had no intention of drinking it. It seemed the thing to do, since I was taking up real estate at the counter. I was in a diner off Highway 101 in San Miguel, not quite a town but a “census-designated place” in central California, bone tired and wondering what the hell I was going to do. It must have been around two in the morning. January 1987. The waitress likely wasn’t used to seeing a twenty-one-year-old nursing a tab at such an hour; she lingered at my stool in a way that seemed to invite words. So I asked her if the local cops were likely to come and roust me, if I were to be found sleeping in my truck.</p>
<p class="indent">“Where you headed?”</p>
<p class="indent">“Nowhere, fast.” I liked the sound of that; I’d been rehearsing it.</p>
<p class="indent">I explained my situation. She said there was a junkyard about a mile down the frontage road.</p>
<p class="indent"><span class="right_1" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_50" title="50"/>“Really?” A warm trickle of hope spread through my limbs, better than any amount of her sour coffee.</p>
<p class="indent">“And don’t worry about cops. CHP is the only police through here.” But that issue was now moot; I no longer felt the need for sleep. The junkyard would likely open in another six hours.</p>
<p class="indent">It had been five hours since my night took a bad turn. I was southbound on 101 in my 1972 Jeepster when a sickening sound from the engine bay—a rapid <i>DAT DAT DAT DAT DAT</i>—announced that Plan A was out the window. As soon as I heard the sound I recalled a certain detail, one of a hundred on a mental to-do list that was a little too haphazard. This one concerned the mounting of the radiator: two bolts rather than four, as I now remembered, one of which didn’t quite seem to match the threads of the nut that I had nonetheless jammed onto it, just to hold the radiator in place “for the time being” as I finished up an engine swap. That time was no longer being.</p>
<p class="indent">I had bought the Jeep the previous summer, after being charmed by a friend’s 1964 International Harvester Scout. Four of us had taken it on a camping trip in the Sierras, a post–high school reunion the highlights of which included an ice-cold waterfall, sleeping under the stars on a massive slab of upturned granite, and the giddy pleasure of bouncing along a rutted trail in four-wheel drive, wondering if various streams were too deep to cross in a vehicle. Having four able-bodied youths to push and pull and dig, if need be, provided a little insurance. Together we might have been able to muster half a horsepower! But the little four-cylinder Scout with the manually locking front hubs handled it all with aplomb. It wasn’t lifted, it had skinny little tires and a soft suspension: perfect. Brian had paid $800 for it. It was painted desert tan.</p>
<p class="indent">The closest equivalent I was able to find, scouring <i>Auto Trader for the Bay Area</i> (a publication of classified ads you could buy at convenience stores) was a 1972 Jeepster Commando, one of the <span class="right_1" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_51" title="51"/>early progenitors of what would soon become the SUV. It was baby blue, lifted, with a removable hard top and no roll bar. I took the top off immediately. Cruising around in the open air, perched atop an obviously unstable death trap, rowing through the gears frequently due to the low-revving engine (it had a manual four-speed mated to a straight-six), I felt like a devilish character in some adventure story. (The young male is given to motorized self-dramatization.) I felt charismatic through no merit of my own—other than having had the inspiration to seek this thing out.</p>
<p class="indent">But the story took a bad turn on the first page. The day after I bought it, I was doing a little nighttime four-wheeling (at a construction site, if you must know—I’m not proud of this) in San Francisco when the motor cut out. As I would discover after having it towed back to my place in Berkeley, a worn motor mount had allowed the engine to bounce around to the point that the oil filter got punctured by the motor mount, and there was no oil pressure warning light. The motor was fried.</p>
<p class="indent">I purchased an engine out of a different model of Jeep from a junkyard, and did the swap out on the street in front of my dad’s house. It took weeks. Every couple of days I had to push the truck along the street to a different spot to satisfy a very zealous parking enforcer named Ortega who already had it in for me, based on my history of inoperable vehicles. A few days after I finished the engine swap, the truck got stolen in broad daylight, on Bancroft Way. Some months later the cops found the cursed thing, and this trip to Santa Barbara was my first real excursion in it.</p>
<p class="indent">Upon hearing the aforementioned <i>DAT DAT DAT</i>, I pulled to the shoulder of the road and popped the hood. I had no flashlight. But, feeling with my hands, it was clear that the radiator had indeed fallen from its mount. Into the fan. Coolant was everywhere, to judge from the sweet smell and slippery wetness. I rooted around in the back, which was full of stuff: I was on my <span class="right_1" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_52" title="52"/>way from Berkeley back to Santa Barbara for the winter term at UCSB. I found a coat hanger and some lineman’s pliers, and I wire-tied the radiator up out of the way of the fan. The question, now, was how much coolant I had lost. And at what rate would it leak out when I started the motor up again? There was no washer fluid in the reservoir. I regretted having stopped to urinate an hour earlier: more precious fluid to use in a pinch.</p>
<p class="indent">I had no water in the truck, but I considered carefully which objects could be turned to use as containers. I had a couple of quarts of oil that might have to be sacrificed on the roadside—not the least of the environmental sins I had committed in the course of six years of dealing with fucked-up old cars. And I had a large stainless steel stockpot that I had been using for cliffside fires and as a makeshift barbeque on surf trips down the coast.</p>
<p class="indent">But where to find water? The road was pitch-dark. I hadn’t passed an exit for maybe fifteen miles, and there was no sign of any exit ahead. I was somewhere near the border between Monterey County and San Luis Obispo County, the heart of rural central California: cattle, lettuce, strawberries, garlic. It was a moonless night; I could not see my own feet on the ground. But I could see a single light off in the distance to the east. Whatever lay between me and the light was invisible. It wasn’t the sort of light that beckoned; the color of it was industrial looking, not commercial. It couldn’t be a porch light.</p>
<p class="indent">I gathered my containers, crossed the highway, and scrambled blindly down an embankment. The sandy terrain was pocked with the fragrant chaparral of the inland coast. I crossed a flat and relatively even area; it seemed to be a dry riverbed. When the light was out of view, I could reckon my direction only by my general sense that the ups and downs of the terrain ran parallel to the highway. Several times I fell hard into what seemed like artificial trenches, very sudden and crisply edged, two or three feet deep. I came to a two-lane road, and now I could see <span class="right_1" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_53" title="53"/>the source of harsh white light that had been my pole star. It was above a door, the only entrance visible in a small compound of corrugated metal buildings, surrounded by a chain-link fence. It was a serious fence, maybe twelve feet high and angled outward at the top. I scanned the building, as much of it as I could see by the light, and didn’t see any hose or spigot.</p>
<p class="indent">I doubted there was a soul in the vicinity. And in any case, I have a real aversion to making a nuisance of myself. I stood there for five minutes thinking, “Oh well.” The voice of defeat. But then I thought of the overland odyssey of getting to this damn light; I was pretty well invested at this point. What the hell. I started yelling from the fenced perimeter. Nothing. I yelled some more. Still nothing. I was about to turn around and head back toward the highway when the door opened. Somebody was shining a flashlight at me.</p>
<p class="indent">“Hey. Hi. Sorry to get you up. I’m looking for some water,” I said, loudly but not yelling. There was no response. But after another ten seconds a floodlight came on, and now I could see the backlit silhouette of a man walking toward me. Only when he got right up to the fence could I see his face. I told him my situation, and also asked how far it was to the next town south.</p>
<p class="indent">“How’d you get here?”</p>
<p class="indent">I pointed over my shoulder with my thumb. “Through there.”</p>
<p class="indent">He paused and seemed to think. Yes, he would fill my containers. Emboldened, I asked if maybe he had some better containers he would be willing to part with. He didn’t think so. He told me to walk twenty yards down the fence line; there was a gate there. He opened the gate, took my containers, and brought them back full after ten minutes. The next exit was Camp Roberts, a military base. After that, he wasn’t sure. I asked him if he knew what the deal was with the trenches that I kept falling into.</p>
<p class="indent">“Those are tank tracks. This area is used for tank training and live-fire exercises.”</p>
<p class="indent"><span class="right_1" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_54" title="54"/>“Oh.”</p>
<p class="indent">Now I had a couple of armfuls of water, and I set off the way I had come. The first problem was that I had no light to guide me on the return. The second problem was sloshing. I was glad it was a warm night (for January) because I was getting pretty wet. I went slowly, taking smaller and more tentative steps than before, trying to visualize the terrain. I imagined how I might show up in a pair of night vision binoculars from the turret of a tank—I made for an odd thermal picture, I guessed, with my pot of cold water hugged to my warm torso, doing what must have looked like a crane dance of delicate marsh steps.</p>
<p class="indent">By the time I reached 101 and found my truck in the darkness, I had two quarts plus about two-thirds of a stockpot of water. I set the water down, opened the cab, and sat down, sweating. It was quiet. The moon was now rising, off to the southeast. I felt the momentary ease that comes with having accomplished something by force of will and physical exertion. I also felt pleased that I had prevailed over my inhibition to ask another human being to render aid, which was the most uncomfortable part. The arduous path by which I had arrived at that chain-link fence made it easier. I wasn’t waving a handkerchief on the side of the road like some helpless incompetent. I had <i>earned</i> the right to ask that man for water, and he gave me water.</p>
<p class="indent">I took the cap off the radiator, which had long since cooled. I hoisted the stockpot up high (the Jeepster was lifted), feeling a burn in my shoulders. I rested it on the valve cover of the straight-six and positioned my body so as not to block the bit of moonlight that now made it possible to make out the features of the engine bay. I carefully tipped the stockpot over the mouth of the radiator and poured. For the first several seconds my aim was approximate, and the water splashed around, but now I had a good pour going, nice and slow. However, the sound of water hitting the ground didn’t decrease. It seemed to increase. It was now a <span class="right_1" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_55" title="55"/>gush that sounded about equal to the rate at which I was pouring water in. I kept pouring, grimly, because there was nothing else to do with this goddamn water.</p>
<p class="indent">Only now did I recall that the entire excursion of the last two hours had been prompted by a mere hypothesis, a hope that the radiator was not completely destroyed. When a situation looks grim, but also you’re not sure exactly how things stand, you form theories that are attractive not because they are the most plausible but because they give you something to <i>do,</i> and doing something is the only way not to be crushed by miasmic uncertainty and despair. Fetching water had given me a purpose. As so often happens for mortals like us, it turned out to be a pointless purpose. But string enough of these together and you’ve got yourself a life, of sorts. We are playthings of the gods, and to provide amusement is not nothing.</p>
<p class="indent">That is easy to say now, but at the moment I wasn’t feeling so philosophical. When you work on cars, you come to identify with them. It’s all about <i>their</i> needs. You put yourself in the service of these needs. Well, guess what, I got needs too. I need to get the hell out of here, Jeepster. Maybe you are <i>disposable</i>.</p>
<p class="indent">It was time to hit the road, heat exchange be damned. I got back in, started the motor, and drove. I’d like to say I drove her like a desperado, but no, I was looking at her temperature gauge the whole time. The needle was moving so fast I could see it sweep, like a second hand. After about two miles it was into the red. I pulled over and shut off the motor. Let’s not talk.</p>
<p class="indent">I waited maybe twenty minutes and did another couple of miles. After a few of these short hops I had passed the Camp Roberts exit, which did not look the least bit hospitable, and made it to San Miguel, where I pulled into the parking lot of the diner. The motor dieseled on for a good fifteen seconds after I turned off the ignition as the red-hot combustion chambers continued to ignite stray bits of hydrocarbon sucked past the throttle <span class="right_1" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_56" title="56"/>plate in a rattling chain reaction that announced the arrival of a long-term counter sitter. Embarrassing.</p>
<p class="indent">Sometime around eight in the morning I picked my head up off my folded-up jacket at a booth in the diner, got in the truck, and drove the mile to the junkyard. I told the owner I had seventeen dollars. He took a long look at me, forming some kind of judgment. Then he let me root around in a pile of radiators. The trick was to find one that had an inlet on the top right and an outlet on the bottom left, with the same hose diameter as the original, and with dimensions that would fit in the available space. Mounting points would have to be improvised. The only viable candidate was from a compact car. I figured it would cool well enough to get me to Santa Barbara. In retrospect, this was a case of what the psychologists call “motivated reasoning.” I wanted it to be true, and the physics major in me backed that wish up. Physicists, when they talk about actual things at all (as opposed to frictionless surfaces and perfect vacuums), register only “order of magnitude” differences. Anything less is too trivial to be of any theoretical interest. This radiator was smaller by about a factor of two. Trivial.</p>
<p class="indent">I got the thing jerry-rigged into my truck. I was absolutely filthy, but happy, and I took off confidently down the frontage road toward the next entrance ramp. Before I even got onto 101, the temperature gauge was spiking. I saw it but decided it was an anomaly. Maybe there was an air bubble in the system and it would work its way out. Or something. I pulled onto 101 going maybe forty miles per hour in a state of willful, desperate theorizing, wishing the temperature away. After another mile reality was becoming too insistent to deny. I was refuted, utterly.</p>
<p class="indent">I nursed it along to the next exit and pulled into the parking lot of the first establishment, a motel. I got out, sat down on the curb with my arms propped up on my knees, and was still. I was done. I had nothing left of will, ideas, or cash. The Jeepster was <span class="right_1" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_57" title="57"/>well and truly cursed, and I was ready to walk away from it: just start walking down Highway 101 like a hobo. I looked the part, certainly.</p>
<p class="indent">A funny thing happened as I sat there: my despair opened up, or it cleared the way for a different feeling. I felt free. Maybe I would take a job and live here in San Miguel for a spell. Maybe I would wander the hills and speak to crows. Maybe some voluptuous single mom would take me in and make me soup. I was healthy, I was capable, and I knew how to talk to strangers.</p>
<p class="indent">Looking back on that moment now, I can see that it was the freedom of faith—faith in my own powers, but also faith that the world was basically hospitable, if I threw myself into it with trust.</p>
<p class="indent">Just as this feeling of lightness and strength was spreading through my body, the owner of the motel came out and said, “Can I help you?”</p>
<p class="indent">Feeling magnanimous, I nodded behind me and said, “You want a Jeepster?”</p>
<p class="indent">He looked over at it. “Not especially. How much?”</p>
<p class="indent">“How much is a train ticket back to Oakland?”</p>
<p class="indent">“Probably fifty dollars.”</p>
<p class="indent">“That’s how much.”</p>
<p class="indent">He drove me to Paso Robles. I took the next Amtrak north. There I retrieved a <i>different</i> piece of shit: a 1963 VW bus that was rotting in my father’s driveway. I dropped the motor, put in a new clutch, and headed once again for Santa Barbara.</p>
<p class="indent">The steering wheel is nearly horizontal in those things, and huge. The effect is that you really do feel like you’re driving a bus, steering hand over hand in a great looping motion around town as the expanse of unsupported sheet metal amplifies the mechanical noises like a drum. The steering wheel also makes a good perch on long trips; you can lean your forearms on it and relax. With your head inches from the flat windshield, you feel like a bow spirit. There is nothing in front of you but a piece of <span class="right_1" epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_58" title="58"/>plate glass. Hunched over this way is a good position in which to give yourself over to reverie as the farms and hills of Central California go by at an unhurried, Volkswagen pace. Sometimes a car seems not simply to move you through the world, but to put you into the world more thoroughly.</p>
</section>
</body>
</html>